And again, as we begin our practice and kind of study, reflection, and our practice for
today, as well as with anything, again and again, just reconnecting with our three essential
motivations with our joy, our appreciation, really expand our Bodhichitta, and connect
with our devotion and awe and reverence for just how perfect this moment is.
So again, welcome. We'll spend maybe 15-20 minutes just kind of reflecting again on some
of the really essential practices and things that our great, precious teachers have given
us as tips and tools to explore the Dharma and develop that and integrate that again
in the context of our Ngondro, these really essential points that we're just encouraged
again and again and again to keep in our mind. Again, the whole of Dharma, like we often say,
can be summed up into these essential points of Dharma practice, the Dharma path, and what
is Dharma, but the totally related with discovering the beautiful qualities and nature and
qualities
and abilities and power of what? Of our own essential nature, of our own mind, of our
own true, everlasting, ever-present Bodhichitta and wisdom and power through the great support
of those who have fully developed it and are well on the way with our teachers, the Buddhas,
the Bodhisattvas. Refraining from harm, engaging in benefit, taming our own mind. That's again,
we say so often, is the distillation of that. That's the Dharma. That's the essence of the
Buddhist teachings as far as the path. So working with our own mind is the essence of
Dharma practice, really connecting with our joy, our devotion, our Bodhichitta, our trust,
which means we've done some exploration and we've summed up both intellectually as well
as experientially in the teachings. And so what I thought to kind of just really, I know
we mention it often and I don't know how much just in these sessions we've really spent
time to look at some of these fundamental aspects of just even like these four thoughts
that turn the mind toward the Dharma, which are nothing other again than just looking
at on a really common level what we all share, what we all have, what we're all endowed with.
So I was going to really, I am going to focus a little bit more today within the time we
have to just kind of review these, the freedoms and endowments of which there are eight freedoms,
eight freedom states, eight states we're totally free of and that allow us to be able to practice
Dharma, to be able to explore our own nature and bring out its beautiful qualities for
ourselves and others. And then so ten states we're free of that would prevent us from practicing
Dharma, from exploring our true nature and then ten circumstances, ten advantages, ten
endowments, ten conditions that we have that are actually totally in alignment with discovering
our true nature. So I know we've gone over them but again even myself, can I remember
what they are? You know the teachings again like the Buddha describes so often or Shanti
Deva, we're born with this precious human body, this that's like a great vessel to bring
ourselves and others across the ocean of samsara, you know so it's so important you know we
don't waste it in vain, we're like or like the Buddha uses the analogy of like a blind
you know totally destitute beggar coming upon a precious jewel and never using it or having
a treasure and never using it, you know having the means to escape from prison and never
applying it, having an open door and staying in the cage you know. So really being mindful
again we're just encouraged so often to really be aware of what are these freedoms, what
are these endowments and then how do we protect them, you know things and not everything lasts
forever. So maybe we'll just kind of go over the basic thing, the eight freedom states
that allow us that eight states were free of in which we couldn't practice dharma, do
you recall what they are? So one thing is to think we can think in order, essentially
it's we're not born in the hell realms, we're not born in the preda realm, not born in which
means the hungry ghost realm, we're not born as animals in any of the animal realms and
we're not born as a formless God in one of the higher aspects of the God realms. But
and then even within being born human, we're not born human in some kind of barbaric culture
you know where there is no dharma, that's what we need by barbarian and here I don't
even necessarily mean official dharma but just where like violence and you know taking
advantage where negative emotions are glorified I guess could be maybe a simple way of looking
at barbarians being born in a place. So we're free of that for the most part. We're also
free of kind of mistaken views to some degree, meaning again these kind of extreme views
of like totally glorifying violence, of glorifying you know pushing making our self-importance
or you know things like that. We're also not born in a universe where a Buddha, a dark
it's called the dark kalpa, we're not born in a place where the where no Buddha has appeared.
So where are we now I think that's seven and then we're not born with so such impaired
senses that we have no contact with the outside world, with the other humans in our world
in the dharma. So we're free of those things. So on the very we could look at the deepest
from the one way of kind of remembering those basically is right there are six realms of
beings that the Buddha said six major realms that all entail samsara. There's the hells,
there's the prey, the prey to realm, there's the animal realm, there's the human realm
and then there's the god realms which are like the asuras and then the gods but we're
not we're not born in the formless. So we could think kind of the furthest outreaches
the hells were free of the predators were free of being born there. We're free of being
born in the animal realm and we're free of being born in one of these higher states of
the god realms which says the formless gods. So essentially what that means that's a state
where we're born gods with just in single with no just kind of asleep for aeons. And
so that's kind of narrowing it down. We are born human and we're free as humans we're
free from being born in a barbaric land in a barbaric culture. We're free of being you
know having kind of wrong views or mistaken views kind of distorted views things that
cause more views that glorify things that bring more trouble actually for ourselves
and others. We're free of that again in different degrees and we're free of being born where
there's no Buddha and we're free and we have all of our immediately we have we're able
to make contact through our senses with the outside world with the world in which we exist.
So that's in a nutshell the eight freedom states that allow us to practice Dharma. But
now we could be born with those things and not necessarily have these extra circumstances
these ten circumstantial states or ten advantages ten endowments for what for actually practicing
the Dharma for engaging with exploring and the nature of our own mind the nature of our
own heart bringing out its qualities purifying what's obscuring at and being a benefit for
others and ourselves realizing true nature and through compassion helping others to realize
their own true nature as well. So within these again there's if we want to kind of have frames
for remembering them there's ten endowments ten advantages and there are five that kind
of are reef we're checking in with our the outside circumstances in which we're born
and then there's five that are more connected to our own individual circumstances and proclivities.
So to go over them again kind of briefly the five we're born actually where a Buddha has
appeared there's so many aeons and so many world systems in which no Buddha ever appears
we're born in an aeon on which a Buddha has appeared in fact not just one Buddha will
appear but according to the omniscient words of truth of the Buddha Shakyamuni you know
there's not just one but a thousand Buddhas appear in this aeon a very called the fortunate
aeon right so a Buddha has appeared and not only did the Buddha appear the Buddha taught
and not only did he teach all those twenty six hundred twenty eight hundred years ago
but those teachings still remain and they can be understood and there are those that
have do currently who have through their great kindness and diligence have some knowledge
and realization of the teachings and with great kindness and bodhicitta share them with
us so those are kind of the circumstances that we outer circumstances that we are endowed
with that allow us to practice Dharma and then we have the five that are related to
our own individual circumstances so within that out those five outer circumstances again
we are born human and we're born human in a place where the Dharma flourishes where the
Dharma is present and alive there's living lineage masters and we have our all our faculties
we have the ability to interface with the outside world and we have you know including
our mind and our intellect not to mention our senses that you know allow that interface
we have those intact and we're also if you think about it we're also born where maybe
in ancient times if you were born blind or deaf you you wouldn't be able to even now
if you were born with maybe some senses that are impaired there's still ways of connecting
a beautiful a great so again I won't do dawdle here all of our faculties are intact and then
we don't have conflicting lifestyles that's the fourth individual circumstance and we have
faith in the teachings so those are the five kind of inner circumstances we have and again
the teachers again and again they say we should really remember what these things are and
contemplate them like you can look in like words of my perfect teacher such a great book
to have and to study it goes into great detail on these kind of subjects and then there's
also this guide to the words of my perfect teacher that Kim Po Na Wong, Palsang, great
emanation of Ima Lamitra goes again into great detail and then of course there's these are
so fundamental they're in so many teachings of Jigmi Lingpa from our venerable teachers
Kenshin Palden, Kim Po Se Wong, Jojum Rinpoche and the torch lighting the way to freedom
goes over these freedoms and advantages and then even to some degree like Dilgo Kenshin
Rinpoche and many teachings I mean Shantideva goes on and on so there's other places to
explore that are easy to like look at these things more so we're born with these things
but again they're not always gonna last in something that Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche whenever
he goes over these things he kind of mentions we should if we remember what these things
are and then we check in for ourselves kind of where we're at I mean we could be familiar
with what what are all like the things we're free of what are those circumstances like
and that's what I was referring to and we can look in these books and in the sutras
and things and really look at well what is it what is some of a glimpse of what it's
like to be born in the hell realms for example anyway but then particularly with these circumstant
ial
endowments really looking at those reflecting on the truth of those and then particularly
with our individual endowments like Kim Po Se Wong mentions often he doesn't kind of go
into detail so much right then but right what are the last two without a conflicting lifestyle
and having faith in the in the teachings those things can waver they can wax and wane with
all of us so like looking to see is good and now there's some other things that also come
up in the teachings that are equally important to kind of be aware of like I think in I forget
which teachings but one of our great masters teachers kind of likens like these 18 freedoms
and endowments are like a flock of sheep that we have in our care and then there's these
other things which are called they're kind of 16 wolves that can be sneaking in and picking
off the flock so these are eight called the eight intrusive circumstances and then I think
eight proclivities eight incompatible yeah proclivities are kind of like habitual patterns
we can get sucked into easily that lead no lead lead to kind of no time for practicing
now and therefore maybe due to karma we're starting to move in a different direction
with the great fortune we've had and so again there's a lot of detail to these things but
I think it you know maybe I'll go for the sake of kind of having some detail to thing
I'll go over them now and again everyone should know definitely and like words of my perfect
teacher these other books I mentioned you can really look at the details of what these
great masters kind of have elucidated in more detail more time than we have this afternoon
to go into so these eight intrusive circumstances that leave no freedom to practice Dharma so
one is essentially and these are related to like these last two our faith and our confidence
in the Dharma and our ability you know kind of to and how much we're leading other right
conduct a right lifestyle that is like conducive to practice Dharma practice meaning it's it's
creating good karma for the future generating merit so and I'm gonna read these things but
similarly we shouldn't use these as big downers so much of the path is purifying so we shouldn't
shy away from when we hit these raw spots of of recognizing our own distorted views
that we're holding our own distorted kind of negative propensities that actually cause
more trouble more turmoil more kind of are actually holding us back and undermining our
practice we're all here due to so many good circumstances so when we realize these things
again these are opportunities to purify to apply the antidotes to ask our you know pray
to our teachers for their support and make our aspirations to be aware of what we can
purify and let go of in order to bring out and bring our bigger bodhicitta and truly
be a benefit for others and ourselves okay so essentially these five intrusive things
that can come into our lives that kind of cause more static and we can get caught up
in and we're not practicing as much as we could and therefore maybe that's creating
karma for maybe the Dharma just fading away from our experience so when the five poisons
when our negative emotions our anger our jealousy you know our attachments our arrogance our
doubt our hesitation when we're so overwhelmed by those coming up in ourselves that we don't
we're just kind of distracted and discouraged and pull back from Dharma practice we forget
it we forget the instructions we forget our bodhicitta you know so many things so you
know these are just things to be to like be aware of right we want to keep our mindfulness
our alertness our conscientiousness to what we hold dear and keep open and aware to like
seeing oh what are these things you know so and then if simply we're just so stupid this
is the second one being so stupid that you know we're actually not for whatever reason
we're not able to really hear the the teachings understand the meaning or the words and essentially
we're easily led astray if we can't really get some bearings and that's simply you know
do do again all this is due to our past actions so what we can can we do then we can pray
you know to our teacher pray to Guru Rinpoche pray to our root teacher and all the Buddhas
and bodhisattvas that we purify our obscurations that our wisdom can increase you know do some
Manjushri practice or something and then taking on like a false guide a bad taking on bad
spiritual friends that kind of lead us in the wrong directions those are also circumstances
we can engage with that aren't heading we're not heading in a good direction I'm sorry
again this is a lot so maybe I'm going to go over some maybe in the future we can look
more into these or as I'm going if you have questions then ask questions and we can have
some kind of dialogue with this process of there are our Saturday meetings then other
things are again this is more related to ourselves just being lazy we've heard the teachings
but we're lazy either we don't have enough you know confidence in ourselves that we could
actually improve or we're just too caught up in other things they have more priority
and we just don't practice lazy and then the six being when we're discouraged by bad karma
ripening and you know which again that's an opportunity for purification but instead of
taking it as that when we challenging circumstances come up and we just like gets are so caught
up in the challenge of it and the suffering of it that we become discouraged and we pull
back from our practice and then the seventh when we're in a situation where we don't have
any autonomy due to whatever the circumstances are where we're we have some commitment or
we're overpowered by some other person or persons in which we don't really have a choice
as to what we're doing and so there may be that means we don't have we can't practice
to some degree or a big degree or fully and then there's sometimes just again as far as
Dharma practice where these are more connected to like attachment to this life where we might
be connecting to the Dharma just really more out of fear fear of challenging situations
fear of sickness fear of poverty fear of you know things that are worth being concerned
about but kind of more involved with this life and without a bigger view of karma without
really bodhicitta that's missing kind of the bigger vision of beyond this life and beyond
samsara so kind of when we're just kind of acting within those kind of more out of where
our fear ratio is much bigger than the ratio of our view of a bigger view beyond this life
beyond samsara then it's kind of again kind of we're not really don't have a real view
of just how vast and how true and how immediate the Dharma is how the teachings are and then
kind of another aspect of that the the eighth intrusive circumstances is kind of more related
to kind of using the Dharma more to how do we say where we're kind of imposters
where we're connecting with the Dharma more you're not so much out of fear but out of
wanting more prestige or wanting more you know wanting more wealth or wanting more food
you know to gain possessions or have people take care of you or you know things like that
again it's more connected to this life and it's not so much again this is the attitude
we can only look to our own minds and see right how much we're looking for you know
essentially right these are the eight worldly concerns when our Dharma our connection to
Dharma is more caught up in the eight worldly concerns hope and fear and more within this
life you know all right so then these other propensities that kind of leave not a lot of
time and freedom to protect actually practice the Dharma again are when we're so tightly
bound to our other commitments in this life in this world that we don't make time to practice
Dharma again that always varies person to person how much time we have but when our
commitments are out so much that it's causing less time to practice formally or informally
and then if we're kind of so ensnared by our negative habitual patterns that we don't try
to improve our behavior we might know better but we don't these are all you know also and
then when we're not really we can hear about all these teachings about what other beings
go through in the hell realms or the praetor realms the animal realms the god realms all
the the defects of samsara essentially as well as the challenges we face in this life
but we just kind of stay numb to it and don't have any kind of for whatever reasons we don't
have our determination or or wish to actually free ourselves not to mention others and now
and then another big really big these are kind of getting more severe as we go and away no
real trust in the teachings or in our teacher where we have very little devotion and trust
in the Dharma or in the teachers again that's a whole process right of actually exploring
the qualities of a good teacher but really looking at you know where for each one of
us is that place where that trust is lacking and then again I'm not talking about that
we have to have blind faith but like true trust due to experience and knowledge and
feeling seeing truth truth enough to move beyond kind of what we know into discovering
right our primordial nature our bodhicitta so no devotion or faith in the Dharma or the
teachers is again really negative kind of propensity and these are all based on habitual
patterns so everything's mutable everything's fluid right then when we take pleasure in
harmful thoughts and harmful actions of ourselves and others and the sixth which is again something
really interesting compilate really negative propensity for practicing Dharma is just simply
really not being interested seven these are in regard to like the promises we've made
to ourselves and to the lungs of the lineage before all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas when
we've entered the you know basic Buddhism the vows we've taken and into Mahayana the
bodhicitta vows and commitments we've taken when we actually break our bodhicitta vows
and commitments and kind of hold back and get caught up in things that move against
them yes really when we're just we're undermining our practice we're dragging a lot of junk
around and then not only with that but then having entered the Vajrayana and with the
Samayas and commitments we've made to ourselves and to our teacher and with in witness of
all objects of refuge when we have broken these and don't acknowledge it and don't purify
it it's really bad news for ourselves and for our friends and Sangha family and all
beings so again this is just things to like keep watch over don't shy away from seeing
these negative things that's why we do our Vajrasattva practice that's why we make our
aspiration prayers that's why we train ourselves in bodhicitta so much of our practice is actually
having this joy devotion confidence and really activating our bodhicitta to purify what's
holding us back because that's again the only difference is how thick our obscurations are
our Buddha nature and the teachings is always there our bodhicitta is vast love vast wisdom
vast compassion is just covered up due to causes and conditions and so are all these
good wonderful freedoms and advantages we have that's also due to such beautiful circumstances
so again we're just by looking at these things we're not ignoring we're acknowledging what's
good and beautiful and that can bring out you know soften our minds and hearts and then
seeing what ways in which we're mixed up you know or have made mistakes and seeing a mistake
as a mistake is the first step to purification because we're we're already pure right in
the teachings but we have to make these moves to actually purify really apply bring stability
to this great beautiful view we're being introduced to bring out our bodhicitta activate our bodhic
itta
means turning our ego clinging upside down you know so again then all all this is coming
back to our own mind and we're so fortunate that we have this precious human birth to
explore our own mind to tame our own mind using this boat of precious human body to
care ourselves and others across the ocean of samsara so that means tending for the to
the boat acknowledging the boat glorifying the boat you know repairing the boat keeping
it good really use this vessel to really benefit ourselves and others so again the teachers
say again and again this is just the first thought that turns the mind right what are
the eight freedoms what are the ten advantages what are these 16 kind of intrusive and kind
of attitudes that we can get snaggled up in and can really lead us away from the advantages
and so apply the antidotes with them refrain from harm engage and benefit tame our own
mind you know these three great assistants whether in our formal practice or our informal
practice really keeping our mindfulness our alertness our conscientiousness it's checking
in gently but fully with how much we're really connecting and again that's why Rinpoche always
again and again our joy our devotion our closeness feeling for the Dharma is so important and
then within that view within that warmth within that nurturing we can look at these other
things that we can be getting mixed up in you know either due to our own ability outer
circumstances that can cause more trouble where we can get easily led more astray and start
going down the wrong path and creating more negative karma as well as our inner attitudes
which are even more important to to be aware of and deal with because it's again our inner
attitude that makes all the difference and as we generate merit and wisdom then we become
stronger and that's the path of awakening so and we the teachings say our teachers say
and it's true we have this beautiful connection and it's not accidental or coincidental or
co-accidental as Rinpoche says it's the result of really good past actions and circumstances
whether it's just hearing the name of a Buddha coming in contact with the bodhisattva to
whatever degree we've developed our merit and wisdom and we're we're moving on the path
we're on this path of awakening and unfolding and purification so we don't know what comes
next but we do know it's totally dependent on our attitude now and the actions we take
so that's why looking at these freedoms and endowments that really all the qualities of
this precious human birth and I just went over today kind of these eight freedoms ten
endowments these 16 kind of wolves to watch out for the kind of things that can really
undermine our practice and but again there's other aspects to the precious human birth
like comparisons of how rare it is how really rare it is for example so we won't go over
that now I'm going to stop talking and I hope this is somewhat helpful again it's kind of
a each part of these teachings are so vast but I think just trying to use these sessions
we have to just kind of reflect on some of these basics and you know like I mentioned
there's so many great teachings for even like I thought to really bring up there's so many
of these YouTube things that have been recorded on YouTube as well as so many wonderful books
published from our teachers Kim Kinchen, Paul Dinschera and Venerable Kim Po Se Wong, Dong
Yeon, as well as so many YouTube teachings and back at the beginning of the pandemic
in 2020, Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche so kindly went over these teachings from Jojo Rinpoche
and he really went into quite a lot of detail on some of these real essential teachings
so that's another wonderful resource for kind of listening to and contemplating and really
enduring into our hearts and minds and settling into our practice so thank you yes in like
words of my perfect teacher of calling it wolves and sheep yeah I mean that's in all
of these I mean in words of my perfect teacher it's definitely in the section where it's
going over again but the four thoughts that turn the mind so in the section on the precious
human birth in words of my perfect teacher it's there in this guide to the words of my
perfect teacher again in that same section on the precious human birth in torch lighting
the way to freedom on the section where Jojo Rinpoche is going over precious human birth
in the four thoughts that turn the mind he goes over all these all these sixteen as well
as well as the eight freedoms endowments and then too I just have this nice book in this
commentary about Dilgo Kenser Rinpoche this which is a commentary on the 37 practices
of a bodhisattva he goes over I think in the chapter about using how the bodhisattva practice
of study contemplation meditation he goes over Dilgo Kenser Rinpoche goes over that eight
freedoms ten endowments and the sixteen intrusive circumstances and propensities and there's
so many other books jigmi lingpas what is it the what is the jigmi lingpa that goes
over the foundation the path treasury of I'm sorry I'm losing my there's a lot out there
about all these things but these are some great just to start there there's nothing
missing there's just more great kind of elucidations from these other great really knowledgeable
and highly realized lineage masters that are available to us so thank you so we'll do our
practice now we have about 45 minutes so we'll have a session for our Monroe practice that
kind of is held within 45 to 50 minutes so just know that I thought as we do our these
sessions we're kind of working with the time we have which we're all doing in our daily
practice too so if you have more time in your day just because we do a 45-minute nundra
practice or half-hour nundra practice on these Saturdays if you have more time then of course
do that there's flexibility but what we want to do for our own individual practice is have
our goals be attainable so the expectations and the promises we make to ourselves and
to our teachers should really be within what our current capacities are so if you have
less time do the full practice but less time if you have more time do the full practice
with more time but as a continuum try to do what you know you can always do no matter
what whether you feel great whether you feel really bad whether great things are happening
whether awful things are happening whether you're sick you know whether you've got a
totally busy schedule what can you know you can always commit to doing and then if you
can do more great do that and in each case dedicate the merit keep the essence of bodhicitta
joy devotion trust closeness feeling reverence bodhicitta bodhicitta bodhicitta okay